Table of Contents
What Is Alpha?
Understanding Alpha
Applying Alpha to Investing
Efficient Market Hypothesis
Seeking Investment Alpha
Example of Alpha
Alpha Considerations
FAQs
The Bottom Line
INVESTING  QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
Alpha: What It Means in Investing, With Examples
By JAMES CHEN

Full Bio
 
 
James Chen, CMT is an expert trader, investment adviser, and global market strategist.

Learn about our editorial policies 
 Updated May 25, 2023
Reviewed by SOMER ANDERSON
Fact checked by TIMOTHY LI
What Is Alpha?
Alpha (α) is a term used in investing to describe an investment strategy's ability to beat the market, or its "edge." Alpha is thus also often referred to as “excess return” or the “abnormal rate of return” in relation to a benchmark, when adjusted for risk. Alpha is often used in conjunction with beta (the Greek letter β), which measures the broad market's overall volatility or risk, known as systematic market risk.

Alpha is used in finance as a measure of performance, indicating when a strategy, trader, or portfolio manager has managed to beat the market return or other benchmark over some period. Alpha, often considered the active return on an investment, gauges the performance of an investment against a market index or benchmark that is considered to represent the market’s movement as a whole.

The excess return of an investment relative to the return of a benchmark index is the investment’s alpha. Alpha may be positive or negative and is the result of active investing. Beta, on the other hand, can be earned through passive index investing.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
Alpha refers to excess returns earned on an investment above the benchmark return when adjusted for risk.
Active portfolio managers seek to generate alpha in diversified portfolios, with diversification intended to eliminate unsystematic risk.
Because alpha represents the performance of a portfolio relative to a benchmark, it is often considered to represent the value that a portfolio manager adds to or subtracts from a fund's return.
Jensen’s alpha takes into consideration the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) and includes a risk-adjusted component in its calculation.
Understanding Alpha
Alpha is one of five popular technical investment risk ratios. The others are beta, standard deviation, R-squared, and the Sharpe ratio. These are all statistical measurements used in modern portfolio theory (MPT). All of these indicators are intended to help investors determine the risk-return profile of an investment.

Active portfolio managers seek to generate alpha in diversified portfolios, with diversification intended to eliminate unsystematic risk. Because alpha represents the performance of a portfolio relative to a benchmark, it is often considered to represent the value that a portfolio manager adds to or subtracts from a fund's return.

In other words, alpha is the return on an investment that is not a result of a general movement in the greater market. As such, an alpha of zero would indicate that the portfolio or fund is tracking perfectly with the benchmark index and that the manager has not added or lost any additional value compared to the broad market.

Applying Alpha to Investing
The concept of alpha became more popular with the advent of smart beta index funds tied to indexes like the Standard & Poor's 500 index and the Wilshire 5000 Total Market Index. These funds attempt to enhance the performance of a portfolio that tracks a targeted subset of the market.

Despite the considerable desirability of alpha in a portfolio, many index benchmarks manage to beat asset managers the vast majority of the time. Due in part to a growing lack of faith in traditional financial advising brought about by this trend, more and more investors are switching to low-cost, passive online advisors (often called roboadvisors​) who exclusively or almost exclusively invest clients’ capital into index-tracking funds, the rationale being that if they cannot beat the market they may as well join it.

Moreover, because most “traditional” financial advisors charge a fee, when one manages a portfolio and nets an alpha of zero, it actually represents a slight net loss for the investor. For example, suppose that Jim, a financial advisor, charges 1% of a portfolio’s value for his services and that during a 12-month period, Jim managed to produce an alpha of 0.75 for the portfolio of one of his clients, Frank.

While Jim has indeed helped the performance of Frank’s portfolio, the fee that Jim charges is in excess of the alpha he has generated, so Frank’s portfolio has experienced a net loss. For investors, the example highlights the importance of considering fees in conjunction with performance returns and alpha.

Efficient Market Hypothesis
The Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) postulates that market prices incorporate all available information at all times, and so securities are always properly priced (the market is efficient.) Therefore, according to the EMH, there is no way to systematically identify and take advantage of mispricings in the market because they do not exist.

If mispricings are identified, they are quickly arbitraged away and so persistent patterns of market anomalies that can be taken advantage of tend to be few and far between.

Empirical evidence comparing historical returns of active mutual funds relative to their passive benchmarks indicates that fewer than 10% of all active funds are able to earn a positive alpha over a 10-plus year time period, and this percentage falls once taxes and fees are taken into consideration. In other words, alpha is hard to come by, especially after taxes and fees.

Because beta risk can be isolated by diversifying and hedging various risks (which comes with various transaction costs), some have proposed that alpha does not really exist, but that it simply represents the compensation for taking some un-hedged risk that hadn't been identified or was overlooked.

Practice trading with virtual money
Find out what a hypothetical investment would be worth today.

SELECT A STOCK

TSLA

AAPL

NKE

AMZN

WMT
SELECT INVESTMENT AMOUNT
$
1000
SELECT A PURCHASE DATE

5 years ago
CALCULATE
Seeking Investment Alpha
Alpha is commonly used to rank active mutual funds as well as all other types of investments. It is often represented as a single number (like +3.0 or -5.0), and this typically refers to a percentage measuring how the portfolio or fund performed compared to the referenced benchmark index (i.e., 3% better or 5% worse).

A deeper analysis of alpha may also include "Jensen’s alpha." Jensen’s alpha takes into consideration the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) market theory and includes a risk-adjusted component in its calculation. Beta (or the beta coefficient) is used in the CAPM, which calculates the expected return of an asset based on its own particular beta and the expected market returns. Alpha and beta are used together by investment managers to calculate, compare, and analyze returns.

The entire investing universe offers a broad range of securities, investment products, and advisory options for investors to consider. Different market cycles also have an influence on the alpha of investments across different asset classes. This is why risk-return metrics are important to consider in conjunction with alpha.

Example of Alpha
This is illustrated in the following two historical examples of a fixed-income ETF and an equity ETF:

The iShares Convertible Bond ETF (ICVT) is a fixed-income investment with low risk. It tracks a customized index called the Bloomberg U.S. Convertible Cash Pay Bond > $250MM Index. The 3-year standard deviation was 18.94%, as of Feb. 28, 2022. The year-to-date return, as of Feb. 28, 2022, was -6.67%. The Bloomberg U.S. Convertible Cash Pay Bond > $250MM Index had a return of -13.17% over the same period. Therefore, the alpha for ICVT was 6.5% in comparison to the Bloomberg U.S. Aggregate Index and a 3-year standard deviation of 18.97%.
1

However, since the aggregate bond index is not the proper benchmark for ICVT (it should be the Bloomberg Convertible index), this alpha may not be as large as initially thought; and in fact, may be misattributed since convertible bonds have far riskier profiles than plain vanilla bonds.

The WisdomTree U.S. Quality Dividend Growth Fund (DGRW) is an equity investment with higher market risk that seeks to invest in dividend growth equities. Its holdings track a customized index called the WisdomTree U.S. Quality Dividend Growth Index. It had a three-year annualized standard deviation of 10.58%, higher than ICVT.
2

As of Feb. 28, 2022, DGRW's annualized return was 18.1%, which was also higher than the S&P 500 at 16.4%, so it had an alpha of 1.7% in comparison to the S&P 500. But again, the S&P 500 may not be the correct benchmark for this ETF, since dividend-paying growth stocks are a very particular subset of the overall stock market, and may not even be inclusive of the 500 most valuable stocks in America.
3

Alpha Considerations
While alpha has been called the “holy grail” of investing, and as such, receives a lot of attention from investors and advisors alike, there are a couple of important considerations that one should take into account when using alpha.

A basic calculation of alpha subtracts the total return of an investment from a comparable benchmark in its asset category. This alpha calculation is primarily only used against a comparable asset category benchmark, as noted in the examples above. Therefore, it does not measure the outperformance of an equity ETF versus a fixed-income benchmark. This alpha is also best used when comparing the performance of similar asset investments. Thus, the alpha of the equity ETF, DGRW, is not relatively comparable to the alpha of the fixed income ETF, ICVT.
Some references to alpha may refer to a more advanced technique. Jensen’s alpha takes into consideration CAPM theory and risk-adjusted measures by utilizing the risk-free rate and beta.
When using a generated alpha calculation it is important to understand the calculations involved. Alpha can be calculated using various different index benchmarks within an asset class. In some cases, there might not be a suitable pre-existing index, in which case advisors may use algorithms and other models to simulate an index for comparative alpha calculation purposes.

Alpha can also refer to the abnormal rate of return on a security or portfolio in excess of what would be predicted by an equilibrium model like CAPM. In this instance, a CAPM model might aim to estimate returns for investors at various points along an efficient frontier. The CAPM analysis might estimate that a portfolio should earn 10% based on the portfolio’s risk profile. If the portfolio actually earns 15%, the portfolio's alpha would be 5.0, or +5% over what was predicted in the CAPM model.

What Are Alpha and Beta in Finance?
Alpha measures the excess return above a benchmark for an investment while beta is the measure of volatility, also known as risk. Active investors seek to achieve alpha returns by employing unique strategies.

What Is a Good Alpha in Finance?
In finance, specifically in trading and investing, what is considered a good alpha will vary depending on the goal of the investor and the risk tolerance. Generally, a good alpha is one that is greater than zero when adjusted for risk.

What Does a Negative Alpha Mean in Stocks?
A negative alpha in stocks means that a stock is underperforming the benchmark when adjusted for risk. If an investor is intending to match or outperform a specific benchmark and their investment portfolio is performing under that rate, then their alpha is negative.

The Bottom Line
The goal of an investor is to achieve the highest returns possible. Alpha is a measure of performance in regard to investment returns that is better when compared to a benchmark when adjusted for risk. Active investors seek to achieve returns that are higher than a benchmark and can employ a variety of strategies to do so. Many funds, such as hedge funds, have the purpose of achieving alpha and charge high management fees for doing so.

ARTICLE SOURCES
Related Terms
What Is Risk Management in Finance, and Why Is It Important?
In the financial world, risk management is the process of identification, analysis, and acceptance or mitigation of uncertainty in investment decisions. more
Understanding Risk-Adjusted Return and Measurement Methods
A risk-adjusted return accounts for the riskiness of an investment compared to the risk-free rate of return. more
Excess Returns Meaning, Risk, and Formulas
Excess returns are returns achieved above and beyond the return of a proxy. Excess returns will depend on a designated investment return comparison for analysis. more
Risk-Return Tradeoff: How the Investment Principle Works
Risk-return tradeoff is a fundamental trading principle describing the inverse relationship between investment risk and investment return. more
What Is Jensen's Measure (Alpha), and How Is It Calculated?
Jensen's measure, or "Jensen's alpha," indicates the portion of an investment manager's performance that did not have to do with the market. more
What Are the 5 Principal Risk Measures and How Do They Work?
Risk measures give investors an idea of the volatility of a fund relative to its benchmark index. Discover more about risk measures here. more


